# Self-Custody Best Practices Guide
Taking custody of your bitcoins and creating a procedure for secure and simple recovery in case of loss, damage, theft etc of device. 
=======
Taking custody of your Bitcoin and creating a procedure for secure and simple recovery in case of loss, damage, theft etc of device. 

Many Bitcoin holders do not practice minimal safety, which could result in loss of their Bitcoins. 

This guide will walk you through the steps to secure your Bitcoin in the best possible manner, create multiple backups of the mnemonic to protect yourself from having a single point of failure,
protect yourself from attackers and your own mistakes, and consider the pros and cons of different procedures.

Securing your Bitcoin - To keep your Bitcoin safe, you only need to secure the mnemonic generated by the wallet and keep it private. If you want to learn how to use Bitcoin Wallets, check out the 
guides on using Bitcoin Wallets.

Create and secure backups - The most crucial step in securing and recovering your Bitcoin is to create backups of your mnemonic. This will protect you from potential loss, damage, theft, or disasters
that may affect the security of the device(mobile, desktop, or hardware wallet) that stores your mnemonic. You should ideally have multiple backups to protect yourself from having a single point of 
failure.

Protect yourself from attackers and your own mistakes - When backing up your mnemonic, you should strike a balance between creating multiple backups to avoid having a single point of failure, and
ensuring that all backup locations are secure, private, accessible, and not susceptible to loss, seizure, restricted access, or theft, in your absence. In other words, your backup procedure shouldn't
be so complex that it opens itself upto attacks or your own carelessness. 

It's essential to keep in mind that if any one of your backups is compromised, your funds can be stolen. Therefore, if you suspect that any of your backups, or the privacy of their location, have
been compromised, you should transfer all your funds to a new wallet with a new mnemonic as soon as possible.

Step-by-step procedure to backup your mnemonic with pros and cons of different options: 

## Step 1. Storing your mnemonic.

### a) Medium(Paper or Metal):
Writing your mnemonic on paper or etching it onto a metal surface are two popular ways to store it offline. The choice between the two depends on your desired level of security, ease-of-use, and accessibility.
 
  • Security: Paper is more vulnerable to damage, theft, or loss and can easily be destroyed by water, fire, or other environmental factors. Metal is sturdier and more resilient, making it a better option for long-term storage
  
  • Ease-of-use and accesibility: Paper is a simple and cost-effective way to store your mnemonic, a good starting point for those new to self-custody.
  Metal, on the other hand, can be more cumbersome to work with and may require additional investment to engrave the words. 

  • Privacy concerns: To ensure privacy, it is important to keep your mnemonic somewhere private and accessible only by you.
  Using a metal plate like the CoinKite SeedPlate can add an extra layer of privacy. 
  
### b) Location:
The location where you keep your paper or metal backup should be private, fireproof, waterproof, and resistant to damage from normal wear and tear.
You should ideally keep your backup in multiple layers of storage, such as a laminated layer, inside a fireproof bag, in a safe, etc.
The location should also be secure from natural disasters, government seizure, restricted access, and privacy violations.
Frequently visit the location and keep checking the state of the storage. 


### c) (Optional)Creative ways to secure mnemonic:
#### Using a cypher-
Using a code or cipher to obfuscate your mnemonic can add an additional layer of security, such as highlighting the words in your favorite books and noting only the page numbers.
However, it can be difficult to remember the code or decode the mnemonic when you need it.

#### Encrypting the mnemonic-
Encryption is a technique that can add an extra layer of security by encoding your mnemonic with a strong password.
This allows you to create redundancy by making and uploading multiple encrypted copies to the internet.


## Step 2. Create another backup and store them in geographically separated locations. 
Create another backup and store it in a different physical location, such as a different home, safety deposit box, or bank vault. 
Such a place will protect you from loss due to natural disasters or damage to one backup.
However, it can also make it harder to protect yourself against theft because you have to secure multiple locations. 
It is important that you find a balance between the two, keep checking on the locations regularly, so don't keep it so far that you cannot visit frequently. 

## Step 3. Secret Passphrase.
You can keep a secret passphrase which is an optional additional phrase used with your mnemonic to recover your wallet.
=======
Pros and Cons of different procedures - Below listed are the different procedures you can follow in creating backups of your mnemonic with their respective pros and cons:

## 1. Different ways to store your mnemonic.
a) Paper or Metal: Writing down your mnemonic on a piece of paper or etching it onto a metal surface are two of the most popular ways to store it offline. The choice to select one between the two 
  must be made depending on the balance in your desired level of security, and ease-of-use and accessibility. The pros and cons in using paper or metal are -
• Security: Paper is more vulnerable to damage, theft, or loss, and can easily be destroyed by water, fire, or other environmental factors, compared to metal which is a sturdy and resilient material
  that can withstand harsh environmental conditions, making it a good option for long-term storage.
• Ease-of-use and accesibility: Paper is an extremely simple way to store your mnemonic which is a good starting point for people new to self-custody because it is easy to write on, carry around if
  someone has to move geographically frequently, and has zero cost. Metal can induce process fatigue for someone new to self-custody, is costlier to buy and engrave words on, and and is bulkier to
  move around with, affecting accessibility. 
• Privacy concerns: Your mnemonic should ideally be kept somewhere private and accessible only by you, but using a metal plate like the CoinKite SeedPlate to engrave your mnemonic gives you an added
  layer of privacy from onlookers and buys you time, compared to paper, which a sophisticated attacker might only need one glance to steal the mnemonic. 

b) Location to keep the backup: The location where you keep the paper or metal storing the backup should be, besides being private, fire and water proof, resistant to damage by normal wear and tear,
  dirt etc. You should ideally keep the paper/metal in layers of storage - laminated, inside a fire-proof bag, in a safe etc. The location should also be such that it is not prone to natural disasters,
  government seizure, restricted access,privacy violations etc. Frequently visit the location and keep checking the state of the storage. 

c) Using a cypher: Using a code or cypher to obfuscate your mnemonic can add an additional layer of security, e.g., highlighting the words in your favourite books and noting down only the page numbers, but it can also be difficult to remember/recover the code or decode the mnemonic when you need it so this technique should be pursued only if you feel comfortable with it or that it is necessary given your life situation.

d) Encrypting the mnemonic(Advanced): Encryption is a technique to encode/hide any message(your mnemonic in this case) which can only be decoded by a secret password. Encrypting your mnemonic with a strong password can add an extra layer of security against unauthorized access and allow you to create redundancy by making and uploading multiple encrypted copies to the internet, but if you lose the password, you will not be able to recover your funds. Encrypting the mnemonic by a password currently does not have a standardized workflow in any of the standard wallets and should be done only by someone with the technical proficiency to manage it.

## 2. Geographically separated backup locations. 
Storing backups in multiple physical locations, such as different homes, safety deposit boxes, or bank vaults that are geographically distant can protect you from loss due to natural disasters or damage, because you can afford to lose one of the backups to them, but it can also make it harder to protect yourself against theft because you have to secure multiple locations. 
It is important that you find a balance between the two, keep checking on the locations regularly, and do not keep any locations so distant from where you live that you induce process fatigue to check on them. 

## 3. Secret Passphrase.
A lot of wallets allow you to keep a secret passphrase which is an optional additional phrase used with your mnemonic to recover your wallet.
>>>>>>> ea1bd51aa09e966477cd9a0272ec45f183e9211b
a) Added layer of security: Adding a secret passphrase to your mnemonic can provide an extra layer of security against unauthorized access, but it also requires additional backups for the passphrase and makes it harder to recover the funds if the passphrase is lost or forgotten.
b) Duress Wallet: Using your mnemonic to create a wallet with a lower balance and a different wallet with the mnemonic+secret passphrase to secure your main savings can provide you with a decoy wallet in case an attacker physically restrains and coerces you or steals your mnemonic. 
c) Useful in creating tree of wallets - Duress, Inheritance, Emergency funds, Recreation: Using passphrases to create different branches of wallets, each having a different purposes can help organize and protect your funds, but it also requires additional backups and management.

<<<<<<< HEAD
## Step 4. Ring of trust (mnemonic with parent/trusted friend):
You can share your mnemonic with trusted family members or friends to provide a backup in case of loss or incapacitation.
However, it requires you to trust them, and can also put your funds at risk if the wrong people gain access due to their irresponsibility. 
=======
## 4. Ring of trust (mnemonic with parent/trusted friend):
Sharing your mnemonic with trusted family members or friends can provide a backup in case of loss or incapacitation, but it also requires you to trust them, and can also put your funds at risk if the wrong people gain access due to their irresponsibility. 
>>>>>>> ea1bd51aa09e966477cd9a0272ec45f183e9211b

## 5. Shamir Secret Sharing:
Shamir Secret Sharing is the technique of splitting the mnemonic into multiple shares and distributing each share to geographically separate locations or with group of people you trust will never collude to steal from you. This can provide redundancy since there is no single point of failure and hence protection against loss or theft of any single share, but this will increase complexity in recovery and backups because you would need access to all the shares to access your funds, and you would need to create backups of each share seperately. 
This is a good technique to protect yourself from having a single point of failure but introduces complexity in recovery and backups, and requires you to trust the people to not collude.

## 6. SeedXOR(Advanced):
Using a technique called SeedXOR to use two mnemonics, each of which might or might not hold any funds, and doing XOR operation on them to form a single mnemonic that secures your money can provide redundancy since there is no single point of failure and hence protection against loss and theft of any one of the two mnemonics. Although, this will increase the complexity of recovery and backups because you would need access to the two mnemonics to access your funds, and you would need to back them up separately.
Also, SeedXOR currently does not have a standardized workflow in any of the standard wallets and should be performed only by someone with the technical proficiency to manage it. 

## 7. Inheritance. 
One important consideration to keep in mind when securing your Bitcoins is figuring out a way your family members/loved ones have some way of accessing your funds in case you become incapacitated or die.
a) Regularly move funds to separate wallets for different beneficiaries with timelock: Moving funds to separate wallets with a timelock can help protect against theft or loss due to unexpected events, but it also requires regular maintenance and management.
b) Trusted guardian: Appointing a trusted guardian to manage your funds in case of incapacitation or death can provide peace of mind, but it also requires you to trust them and can put your funds at risk if the wrong person gains access if they are irresponsible. 
c) Treasure map for children: Providing instructions or clues to your heirs can help them access your funds in case of your death or incapacitation, but it also requires careful planning and management as you want it to be simple enough for them to understand but also secure so that they cannot steal from you before you intend to pass the money on.

## 8. Timelocks.
The Bitcoin Network allows you to embed a timelock on a transaction, ie, you can send your money to an address such that it can only be spent from it after a certain specified amount of time has elapsed. 
Moving funds to a timelocked address can protect your funds against physical attackers or the temptation to sell early, but it also requires careful and deliberate planning - to avoid needing to access the funds before the timelock expires.

<<<<<<< HEAD
9. Multi-Sig Wallets. The Bitcoin Network allows you to secure your money such that it requires multiple keys to spend from that address - known as multi-signature transaction. Quite a few people have started using multi-sig functionality to secure their funds to protect themselves against loss or theft of one(or more)keys. 
=======
## 9. Multi-Sig Wallets.
The Bitcoin Network allows you to secure your money such that it requires multiple keys to spend from that address - known as multi-signature transaction. Quite a few people have started using multi-sig functionality to secure their funds to protect themselves against loss or theft of one(or more)keys. 
>>>>>>> ea1bd51aa09e966477cd9a0272ec45f183e9211b
a) Benefits: Using a multi-sig wallet with multiple keys can provide protection against loss or theft of any single key, ie, removes a single point of failurr entirely because you can affored to lose one(or more) keys to loss or theft, but it also requires careful management and coordination of the keys to access your funds and make a transaction. 

It also protects you from defective/compromised hardware wallet by distributing the risk across multiple devices. 

b) Costs: Using a multi-sig wallet to recover your Bitcoin and spend it requires you to get access to and manage multiple devices which can be cumbersome. It also increases the complexity of backing up N times the number of keys required to spend the transaction, because you would need to create and secure as many backups as the total number of mnemonics. 

Ideal procedures for self-custody of Bitcoin will be highly individualistic depending on the person's comfort with using devices, risk-appetite, ability to manage different locations, ring of trust, percentage  of savings in Bitcoin, stability in government, life-situation etc. Every user of Bitcoin should try to assess their level of security and comfort, and take each security measure one step at a time.

Begin with one backup, and how to best secure it from attackers and from your own carelessness, keep checking on it regularly, and then start creating more backups. 
